ready for review (#62)
rstudio/tensorflow-blog: _posts/2019-11-27-gettingstarted-2020/getting-started-2020.Rmd

---
title: "Getting started with Keras from R - the 2020 edition"
description: > 

>  Looking for materials to get started with deep learning from R? This post presents useful tutorials, guides and background documentation on the new TensorFlow for R website. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Looking for materials to get started with deep learning from R? This post presents useful tutorials, guides, and background documentation on the new TensorFlow for R website. 
```

 Advanced users will find pointers to applications of new release 2.0 (or upcoming 2.1!) features alluded to in the recent TensorFlow 2.0 post.
author:
  - name: Sigrid Keydana
    affiliation: RStudio
    affiliation_url: https://www.rstudio.com/
slug: keydana2019gettingstarted2020
date: 11-27-2019
categories:
  - Introductions
  - Keras
output:
  distill::distill_article:
    self_contained: false
preview: images/website.png
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE)
```

> If you've been thinking about diving into deep learning for a while -- using R, preferentially --, now is a good time. For TensorFlow / Keras, one of the predominant deep learning frameworks on the market, last year was a year of substantial changes; for users, this sometimes would mean ambiguity and confusion about the "right" (or: recommended) way to do things. By now, [TensorFlow 2.0](https://blogs.rstudio.com/tensorflow/posts/2019-10-08-tf2-whatchanges/) has been the current stable release for about two months; the mists have cleared away, and patterns have emerged enabling leaner, more modular code that accomplishes a lot in just a few lines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you've been thinking about diving into deep learning for a while -- using R, preferentially --, now is a good time. For TensorFlow / Keras, one of the predominant deep learning frameworks on the market, last year was a year of substantial changes; for users, this sometimes would mean ambiguity and confusion about the "right" (or: recommended) way to do things. By now, [TensorFlow 2.0](https://blogs.rstudio.com/tensorflow/posts/2019-10-08-tf2-whatchanges/) has been the current stable release for about two months; the mists have cleared away, and patterns have emerged, enabling leaner, more modular code that accomplishes a lot in just a few lines.
```

Reviewer: ^^ just added a comma, which doesn't show well in the diff 🙁

To give the new features the space they deserve, and assemble central contributions from related packages all in one place, we have significantly remodeled the [TensorFlow for R website](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/). So this post really has two objectives. 

First, it would like to do exactly what is suggested by the title: Point new users to resources that make for an effective start into the subject. 

> Second, it could be read as a "best of new website content". Thus, as an existing user, you might still be interested in giving it a quick skim, checking for pointers to new features that appear in familiar contexts. To make this easier, we'll add side notes to have new features stand out in the text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Second, it could be read as a "best of new website content". Thus, as an existing user, you might still be interested in giving it a quick skim, checking for pointers to new features that appear in familiar contexts. To make this easier, we'll add side notes to highlight new features.
```

<aside>
The [regression tutorial](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/tutorials/beginners/basic-ml/tutorial_basic_regression/) now uses feature columns for convenient data preprocessing.
</aside>

This introduction to regression is complemented by a [tutorial on multi-class classification](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/tutorials/beginners/basic-ml/tutorial_basic_classification/) using "Fashion MNIST". It is equally suited for a first encounter with Keras.

> A third tutorial to be mentioned in this section is dedicated to [text classification](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/tutorials/beginners/basic-ml/tutorial_basic_text_classification/). Here too, there is a hidden gem in the current version that makes text preprocessing a lot easier: `layer_text_vectorization`, one of the brand new [Keras preprocessing layers](https://github.com/keras-team/governance/blob/master/rfcs/20190502-preprocessing-layers.md).^[In fact, it is that new that as of this writing, you will have to install the nightly build of TensorFlow -- as well as `tensorflow` from github -- to use it.] If you've used Keras for NLP before: No more messing with `text_tokenizer`!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A third tutorial in this section is dedicated to [text classification](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/tutorials/beginners/basic-ml/tutorial_basic_text_classification/). Here too, there is a hidden gem in the current version that makes text preprocessing a lot easier: `layer_text_vectorization`, one of the brand new [Keras preprocessing layers](https://github.com/keras-team/governance/blob/master/rfcs/20190502-preprocessing-layers.md).^[In fact, it is so new that as of this writing, you will have to install the nightly build of TensorFlow -- as well as `tensorflow` from github -- to use it.] If you've used Keras for NLP before: No more messing with `text_tokenizer`!
```

Reviewer: I removed "to be mentioned" from the first sentence, since you're in the act of mentioning it already!

Reviewer: Also changed "it is that new..." to "it is **so** new..."

Author: Right :-))

<aside>
Check out the new text vectorization layer in the [text classification tutorial](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/tutorials/beginners/basic-ml/tutorial_basic_text_classification/).
</aside>

> The tutorials just mentioned are all nice introductions explaining code as well as concepts. What if you're familiar with the basic procedure and just need a quick reminder (or: something to quickly copy-paste from)? The ideal document to consult for those purposes is the [Overview](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/tutorials/beginners/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These tutorials are nice introductions explaining code as well as concepts. What if you're familiar with the basic procedure and just need a quick reminder (or: something to quickly copy-paste from)? The ideal document to consult for those purposes is the [Overview](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/tutorials/beginners/).
```

Now -- knowledge how to build models is fine, but as in data science overall, there is no modeling without data.

### Data ingestion and preprocessing

Two detailed, end-to-end tutorials show how to load [csv data](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/tutorials/beginners/load/load_csv/) and 
[images](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/tutorials/beginners/load/load_image/), respectively.

> In current Keras, two mechanisms are central to data preparation. One is the use of [tfdatasets pipelines](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/guide/tfdatasets/introduction/). `tfdatasets` lets you load data in a streaming fashion (batch-by-batch), optionally applying transformations as you go. The other handy device here is [feature specs](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/guide/tfdatasets/feature_spec/) resp. [feature columns](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/guide/tfdatasets/feature_columns/). Together with a matching Keras layer, these allow for transforming the input data without having to think about what the new format will mean to Keras.

Reviewer: OK, so I looked up [resp.](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/resp.) because I wasn't quite sure what it meant as you've used it (I thought it meant respectively, and it _does_ there's just a slight difference in order that I guess is the opposite in German). 

From the link above: 
> Like the unabbreviated form respectively, this abbreviation is used postfix, as in "X or Y, resp.". Some ESL writers use it infix, as in "X resp. Y", by false analogy with German bzw., dated-syntax Danish hhv. and Swedish resp., but this is not considered correct.

Reviewer: So, you would use "resp." just as you've used "respectively" in the first sentence of the paragraph above, i.e. "...feature specs or feature columns, resp."

Author: Oh!! That's good to know, great you looked it up :-)
Does "ESL" stand for "English as second language" (yeah just googled , evidently it does).
Then I need sth else to fit in that position, syntactically ... 

actually these are pretty _wrong_  semantically even (or not _wrong_, but don't match) ... https://dict.leo.org/german-english/beziehungsweise

Author: I think here i can just throw it out completely, actually i'm not even using it the way i thought i was ;-)))

While there are other types of data not discussed in the docs, the principles -- pre-processing pipelines and feature extraction -- generalize.

### Model saving

The best-performing model is of little use if ephemeral. Straightforward ways of saving Keras models are explained in a dedicated [tutorial](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/tutorials/beginners/basic-ml/tutorial_save_and_restore/). 

<aside>
Advanced users: Additional options exist; see the [tutorial on checkpoints](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/guide/saving/checkpoints/).
</aside>

And unless one's just tinkering around, the question will often be: How can I deploy my model?
There is a complete new section on [deployment](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/deploy/), featuring options like `plumber`, Shiny, TensorFlow Serving and RStudio Connect.

<aside>
Check out the new section on [deployment options](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/deploy/).
</aside>

After this workflow-oriented run-through, let's see about different types of data you might want to model.

## Neural networks for different kinds of data

> No introduction to deep learning without image classification. The "Fashion MNIST" classification tutorial mentioned in the beginning is a good introduction, but it uses a fully connected neural network to make it easy to remain focused on the overall approach. Standard models for image recognition, however, are commonly based on a convolutional architecture. [Here](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/tutorials/advanced/images/cnn/) is a nice introductory tutorial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No introduction to deep learning is complete without image classification. The "Fashion MNIST" classification tutorial mentioned in the beginning is a good introduction, but it uses a fully connected neural network to make it easy to remain focused on the overall approach. Standard models for image recognition, however, are commonly based on a convolutional architecture. [Here](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/tutorials/advanced/images/cnn/) is a nice introductory tutorial.
```

Reviewer: You don't have to use "is complete" but you need some sort of condition there.

Author: oh yeah, much better...

> For text data, the concept of _embeddings_ -- distributed representations endowed with a measure of similarity -- is central. As in the aforementioned text classification tutorial, embeddings can be learned using the respective Keras layer; in fact, the more idiosyncratic the dataset, the more recommendable this approach. Often though, it makes a lot of sense to use _pre-trained embeddings_, obtained from large language models trained on enormous amounts of data. With TensorFlow Hub, discussed in more detail in the last section, pre-trained embeddings can be made use of simply by integrating an adequate _hub layer_, as shown in [one of the Hub tutorials](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/tutorials/beginners/basic-ml/tutorial_basic_text_classification_with_tfhub/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For text data, the concept of _embeddings_ -- distributed representations endowed with a measure of similarity -- is central. As in the aforementioned text classification tutorial, embeddings can be learned using the respective Keras layers; in fact, the more idiosyncratic the dataset, the more recommendable this approach. Often though, it makes a lot of sense to use _pre-trained embeddings_, obtained from large language models trained on enormous amounts of data. With TensorFlow Hub, discussed in more detail in the last section, pre-trained embeddings can be made use of simply by integrating an adequate _hub layer_, as shown in [one of the Hub tutorials](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/tutorials/beginners/basic-ml/tutorial_basic_text_classification_with_tfhub/).
```

Reviewer: Changed "Keras layer" to "Keras layers" — but, obviously, change it back if I'm wrong about it referencing multiple layers. 🙂

Reviewer: > With TensorFlow Hub, discussed in more detail in the last section,

This is one of those weird scenarios where "last" could refer to previous _or_ final. I think you mean final here, so you might switch it to that to ensure no one thinks they missed something earlier.

Author: yeah it was referring to one specific layer type - probably i should just name it, in parens!

Author: exactly... i knew this sounded weird, but "final" didn't come to mind...

<aside>
Models from TF Hub can now conveniently be integrated into a model as Keras layers.
</aside>

> As opposed to images and text, "normal", a.k.a. _tabular_, a.k.a. _structured_ data often seems like less of a candidate for deep learning. Historically, the mix of data types -- numeric, binary, categorical --, together with different handling in the network ("leave alone" resp. embed) used to require a fair amount of manual fiddling. In contrast, the [Structured data tutorial](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/tutorials/advanced/structured/classify/) shows the, quote-unquote, modern way, again using feature columns and feature specs. The consequence: If you're not sure that in the area of tabular data, deep learning will lead to improved performance -- if it's as easy as that, why not give it a try?

Reviewer: There's another "resp." here where you'll want to flip it up e.g. ("leave alone" or embed, resp.)

Author: i think i don't like postfix resp... "or" should do as well ;-)
